Transpiler introduction section (#260)
Qiskit/documentation: docs/transpile/index.mdx

---
title: Introduction to the transpiler
description: Introduction to the transpiler

---

# Introduction to the transpiler

Transpilation is the process of rewriting a given input circuit to match the topology of a specific quantum device and optimize the circuit instructions for execution on present-day noisy quantum systems.  

> A central component of Qiskit, the transpiler is designed for modularity and extensibility. The goal is to be able to easily write new circuit transformations (known as transpiler **passes**), and combine them with other existing passes.  Which passes are chained together and in which order has a major effect on the final outcome. This pipeline is determined by a **pass manager**, which schedules the passes and also allows passes to communicate with each other by providing a shared space. In this way, the transpiler opens up the door for research into aggressive optimization of quantum circuits.

Author: I am trying to think of a less idiomatic way to rephrase "opens up the door", but anything I think of is just as metaphoric 😆 (paves the way? Makes space for?.... not any better!) so I'll leave it for now unless you can think of something!

Reviewer: Also changed this around to also speak to utility scale work.  Let me know what you all think!

> This documentation covers the tooling and workflows available to Qiskit users.  If you're using primitives and are only interested in st using the default transpilation options, look to the section [Configure error suppression for Qiskit Runtime.](../run/configure-error-suppression)

Author: Also FYI @kaelynj -- Blake just pushed a change to the naming of the error suppression/error mitigation pages, including their filenames, so we'll need to update this link. It happened [in this PR](https://github.com/Qiskit/documentation/pull/251) -- looks like the new title should be Configure runtime compilation and the link would be `../run/configure-runtime-compilation`

## Transformation passes

> For more advanced users, it is important to understand the various representations of quantum circuits that are used for the transpilation step along with the transformations (i.e., *passes*) that affect the efficiency of the final circuit that is sent to the backend.  This involves rewriting quantum circuits to match hardware constraints and suppressing the effects of noise.  The flow of logic for this tool chain is quite customizable and need not be linear.  One can prepare iterative loops, conditional branches, and other complex behaviors.  A good starting place when developing your own set of passes is by looking to the default sequence of transformations:

Reviewer 2: I think this section should be reversed 🤔  Currently it starts off by talking about things advanced users need to know and ends with talking about the simpler defaults. I think a more natural flow would be to start with the default transformations, and then go on to talk about how advanced users can build on that knowledge to then create their own passes etc.

This is the first page where beginners are introduced to these default sequences as well as the advanced users, so i think it's worth highlighting for the beginners as well

Reviewer: That makes sense.  I've switched things around now, though there's a broken link to the api and need help fixing the link.

I'm also wondering if we have a practice (or would be a good idea to implement a practice) of linking to the api reference whenever we mention a particular object or function.

---
title: Introduction to the transpiler
description: Introduction to the transpiler

---

# Introduction to the transpiler

Transpilation is the process of rewriting a given input circuit to match the topology of a specific quantum device and optimize the circuit instructions for execution on present-day noisy quantum systems.  

> A central component of Qiskit, the transpiler is designed for modularity and extensibility. The goal is to be able to easily write new circuit transformations (known as transpiler **passes**), and combine them with other existing passes.  Which passes are chained together and in which order has a major effect on the final outcome. This pipeline is determined by a **pass manager**, which schedules the passes and also allows passes to communicate with each other by providing a shared space. In this way, the transpiler allows one to begin approaching utility scale work while keeping noise manageable.

Reviewer 2: reminder for this paragraph:

- less human language (software isn't communicating with itself)
- "you" instead of "one"

> This documentation covers the tooling and workflows available to Qiskit users.  If you're using primitives and are only interested in the default transpilation options, look to the section [Configure error suppression for Qiskit Runtime.](../run/configure-runtime-compilation)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This documentation covers the tooling and workflows available to Qiskit users.  If you're using primitives and are only interested in the default transpilation options, look to the section [Configure runtime compilation for Qiskit Runtime.](../run/configure-runtime-compilation)
```

> This documentation covers the tooling and workflows available to Qiskit users.  If you're using primitives and are only interested in st using the default transpilation options, look to the section [Configure error suppression for Qiskit Runtime.](../run/configure-runtime-compilation)

Reviewer 2: "interested in st using" - typo?

Author: Possibly my bad -- I recall trying to remove the word just bc it's a potential confuser for translation, and may have only partially removed the word! I'll clean it up

Author: done in https://github.com/Qiskit/documentation/pull/260/commits/b7843c5b85e06cf06dd0a17bb930d19f900d5345

> This documentation covers the tooling and workflows available to Qiskit users.  If you're using primitives and are only interested in st using the default transpilation options, look to the section [Configure error suppression for Qiskit Runtime.](../run/configure-runtime-compilation)

Author: ```suggestion
This documentation covers the tooling and workflows available to Qiskit users.  If you're using primitives and are only interested in the default transpilation options, look to the section [Configure error suppression for Qiskit Runtime.](../run/configure-runtime-compilation)
```

## Default Transpilation
The basic usage of the transpiler is to call the `qiskit.compiler.transpile()`](../api/qiskit/compiler#compilation-routines) function.  This will generate one of the present `PassManager`s based on, among other options, an `optimization_level` flag which can be set to either 0, 1, 2, or 3.  Higher levels generate more optimized circuits, at the expense of longer transpilation times.  Each of these preset `PassMangers` are composed of six basic stages:

> 1. `init` - This pass runs any initial passes that are required before we start embedding the circuit to the backend.  This typically involves unrolling custom instructions and converting the circuit to all single- and two-qubit gates.

Reviewer 2: put small note in brackets that init does nothing unless you configure it

1. `layout` - This pass applies a *layout*, mapping/assigning the virtual qubits in your circuit to the physical qubits of a backend.
1. `routing` - This pass runs after a layout has been applied and will inject gates (i.e., SWAPs) in the original circuit in order to make it compatible with the backend's connectivity/coupling map.
1. `translation` - This pass translates the gates in the circuit to the backend's basis set of instructions.
1. `optimization` - This pass runs an optimization loop to find more efficient decompositions of your quantum circuit until a condition is met (such as a fixed depth).

> 1. `scheduling` - This pass is for any hardware-aware optimizations that improve the efficiency of the executed microwave pulse instructions.

Reviewer 3: Scheduling is not necessarily an optimization stage, it's only constraint is to take into account the duration of operations and ensure all the time is accounted for in the circuit. The simplest example is to just insert explicit delay instructions for any idle periods on a qubit. There's a lot of detail on what it involves here: https://qiskit.org/documentation/dev/apidoc/transpiler.html#scheduling-stage

Reviewer: Ah right I see.  Is it still one of the stages that are built in the preset passmanagers?  My thought would be to include them if they are to make it clear what each stage of the preset passes consist of.  But if they don't then I don't see a need to mention it here.

Reviewer 3: Yes, scheduling is in the preset pass managers; it's the last stage. But, by default we do a minimal amount of work in the stage, mainly to just validate we don't need to run more thorough scheduling. Most backends do scheduling better than qiskit as they have more information available to do a more complete job. But if the user sets the `scheduling_method` argument it will take care of the scheduling.

Author: fixed here https://github.com/Qiskit/documentation/pull/260/commits/08f47f71cd28bd014c7d86273eefa5b5e60aaf35

Each of the preset pass managers include these steps and the primary difference between them are the specific that are called at each stage, set by the `optimization_level` flag.

## Customizing Passes

> For more advanced users, one can customize their own set of `PassManager` objects and determine the ordering in which each stage is run.  This can dramatically change the final circuit which is output. If fact, oftentimes a bespoke approach to transpiling one's quantum algorithm produces more efficient error suppression than the default approach.  This involves rewriting quantum circuits to match hardware constraints and suppressing the effects of noise.  The flow of logic for this tool chain is quite customizable and need not be linear.  One can prepare iterative loops, conditional branches, and other complex behaviors.  A good starting place when developing your own set of passes is by looking to the default sequence of transformations:

Reviewer 3: The one thing that might be worth distinguishing here (I'm sure follow on docs will cover it) is between `PassManager` and `StagedPassManager`. `PassManager` is a sequence of passes that has optional control flow (i.e. loops and if conditions) on the execution of passes. Then the `StagedPassManager` organizes multiple pass managers into discrete named stages that execute in order. the preset pass managers in qiskit's transpiler are `StagedPassManagers` and the 6 stages are named stages. So you can do:

```python
staged_pm = generate_preset_pass_manager(3, backend)
custom_layout = PassManager(...)
staged_pm.layout = custom_layout
```

Reviewer: That's a good point!  I'm working on the docs page for the preset passmanagers and this would be important to include so I'll be sure to include this distinction there.

> For more advanced users, one can customize their own set of `PassManager` objects and determine the ordering in which each stage is run.  This can dramatically change the final circuit which is output. If fact, oftentimes a bespoke approach to transpiling one's quantum algorithm produces more efficient error suppression than the default approach.  This involves rewriting quantum circuits to match hardware constraints and suppressing the effects of noise.  The flow of logic for this tool chain is quite customizable and need not be linear.  One can prepare iterative loops, conditional branches, and other complex behaviors.  A good starting place when developing your own set of passes is by looking to the default sequence of transformations:

Author: Yes it's true -- mostly we just try to avoid passive voice when possible, and second person tends to be what suggests action.  I didn't try fixing it here because I'd like to have a larger discussion that defines a clear guideline (and then audit all docs based on that), but no reason not to now that it's called out :)

> For more advanced users, one can customize their own set of `PassManager` objects and determine the ordering in which each stage is run.  This can dramatically change the final circuit which is output. If fact, oftentimes a bespoke approach to transpiling one's quantum algorithm produces more efficient error suppression than the default approach.  This involves rewriting quantum circuits to match hardware constraints and suppressing the effects of noise.  The flow of logic for this tool chain is quite customizable and need not be linear.  One can prepare iterative loops, conditional branches, and other complex behaviors.  A good starting place when developing your own set of passes is by looking to the default sequence of transformations:

Reviewer: Changed it here to third person just in case we end up deciding on a clear guideline :)

Find more information about the pass manager stages in the [Transpiler stages and preset pass managers](passmanagers) topic.

## Transpiler stages
Qiskit utilizes a set of six fundamental stages in the prebuilt transpiler pipeline:

1. `init` - This pass runs any initial passes that are required before we start embedding the circuit to the backend.  This typically involves unrolling custom instructions and converting the circuit to all single- and two-qubit gates. (By default this will just validate the circuit instructions and translate multi-qubit gates into 1 and 2 qubit gates)
1. `layout` - This pass applies a *layout*, mapping/assigning the virtual qubits in your circuit to the physical qubits of a backend.
1. `routing` - This pass runs after a layout has been applied and will inject gates (i.e., SWAPs) in the original circuit in order to make it compatible with the backend's connectivity/coupling map.
1. `translation` - This pass translates the gates in the circuit to the backend's basis set of instructions.
1. `optimization` - This pass runs an optimization loop to find more efficient decompositions of your quantum circuit until a condition is met (such as a fixed depth).

> 1. `scheduling` - This pass is for any hardware-aware optimizations that improve the efficiency of the executed microwave pulse instructions.

Author: ```suggestion
1. `scheduling` - This optional stage is for any hardware-aware scheduling passes. It accounts for all idle time in the circuit.
```

Reviewer 3: This looks fine, but I would drop the "optional" here, the stage is always present and runs. The work it does is just minimal unless the user opts in. Maybe change the second sentence to something like "If the user specifies a scheduling method this stage will account for all idle time in the circuit."?

---
title: Introduction to the transpiler
description: Introduction to the transpiler

---

# Introduction to the transpiler

> Transpilation is the process of rewriting a given input circuit to match the topology of a specific quantum device and optimize the circuit instructions for execution on present-day noisy quantum systems.  This documentation covers the tooling and workflows for transpilation which are available to Qiskit users.  If you're using primitives and are only interested in the default transpilation options, look to the section [Configure runtime compilation for Qiskit runtime.](../run/configure-runtime-compilation)

Author: ```suggestion
Transpilation is the process of rewriting a given input circuit to match the topology of a specific quantum device and optimize the circuit instructions for execution on present-day noisy quantum systems.  This documentation covers the tooling and workflows for transpilation available to Qiskit users.  If you're using primitives and are only interested in the default transpilation options, look to the section [Configure runtime compilation for Qiskit runtime.](../run/configure-runtime-compilation)
```

> A central component of Qiskit, the transpiler is designed for modularity and extensibility. Its central goal is to be able to easily write new circuit transformations (known as transpiler **passes**), and combine them with other existing passes, allowing you to greatly reduce the depth and complexity of your quantum circuits.  Which passes are chained together and in which order has a major effect on the final outcome. This pipeline is determined by `PassManager` and `StagedPassManager` objects.  The `StagedPassManager` will orchestrate the execution one or more `PassMangers` and determine the order in which they are executed, while the `PassManger` object is merely a collection of one or more passes.  Think of the `StagedPassManager` as the conductor in an orchestra, the `PassManagers` as the different instrument sections, and the `Passes` as the individual musicians.  In this way, you have the power to compose hardware efficient quantum circuits and allow you to execute utility scale work while keeping noise manageable.

Author: ```suggestion
A central component of Qiskit, the transpiler is designed for modularity and extensibility. Its central goal is to be able to easily write new circuit transformations (known as transpiler **passes**), and combine them with other existing passes, allowing you to greatly reduce the depth and complexity of your quantum circuits.  Which passes are chained together and in which order has a major effect on the final outcome. This pipeline is determined by `PassManager` and `StagedPassManager` objects.  The `StagedPassManager` will orchestrate the execution of one or more `PassManagers` and determine the order in which they are executed, while the `PassManager` object is merely a collection of one or more passes.  Think of the `StagedPassManager` as the conductor in an orchestra, the `PassManagers` as the different instrument sections, and the `Passes` as the individual musicians.  In this way, you have the power to compose hardware-efficient quantum circuits and allow you to execute utility-scale work while keeping noise manageable.
```

> ## Transpiler Stages

Author: ```suggestion
## Transpiler stages
```

Qiskit utilizes a set of six fundamental stages in the prebuilt transpiler pipeline:

> 1. `init` - This pass runs any initial passes that are required before we start embedding the circuit to the backend.  This typically involves unrolling custom instructions and converting the circuit to all single- and two-qubit gates. (By default this does nothing)

Author: ```suggestion
1. `init` - This pass runs any initial passes that are required before we start embedding the circuit to the backend.  This typically involves unrolling custom instructions and converting the circuit to all single- and two-qubit gates. (By default this does nothing)
```

Reviewer: Need to change the part in parentheses since it's not technically correct.  There's a verification check to see if any control flow operations are valid and unrolls 3-qubit gates to 1 and 2 qubit gates.

1. `layout` - This pass applies a *layout*, mapping/assigning the virtual qubits in your circuit to the physical qubits of a backend.

> 1. `routing` - This pass runs after a layout has been applied and will inject gates (i.e., SWAPs) in the original circuit in order to make it compatible with the backend's connectivity/coupling map.

Author: ```suggestion
1. `routing` - This pass runs after a layout has been applied and will inject gates (such as SWAPs) in the original circuit in order to make it compatible with the backend's connectivity/coupling map.
```

1. `translation` - This pass translates the gates in the circuit to the backend's basis set of instructions.
1. `optimization` - This pass runs an optimization loop to find more efficient decompositions of your quantum circuit until a condition is met (such as a fixed depth).

> 1. `scheduling` - This pass is for any hardware-aware optimizations that improves the efficiency of the executed microwave pulse instructions.

Author: ```suggestion
1. `scheduling` - This pass is for any hardware-aware optimizations that improve the efficiency of the executed microwave pulse instructions.
```

 If you decide to customize your own transpilation workflow, we suggest using these stages as a guideline during development.

> ## Default Transpilation

Author: ```suggestion
## Default transpilation
```

> ## Default transpilation

Reviewer 2: @beckykd @nbronn can you review this default transpilation section and wrt what you're doing in the transpiler defaults page? Generally I think we should avoid duplicating too much and focus on haveing the intro funnel people out towards the defaults page

The basic usage of the transpiler is to call the [`qiskit.compiler.transpile()`](../api/qiskit/compiler#compilation-routines) function.  This will generate and run one of the preset `StagedPassManager`s based on, among other options, an `optimization_level` flag which can be set to either 0, 1, 2, or 3.  Higher levels generate more optimized circuits, at the expense of longer transpilation times.

> - `optimization_level=0`: Just maps the circuit to the backend, with no explicit optimization.

Author: ```suggestion
- `optimization_level=0`: Maps the circuit to the backend, with no explicit optimization.
```

- `optimization_level=1`: Maps the circuit, but also does some lightweight optimizations by collapsing adjacent gates.
- `optimization_level=2`: Medium-weight optimization, including a noise-adaptive layout and a gate-cancellation procedure based on gate commutation relationships.
- `optimization_level=3`: Heavy-weight optimization, which in addition to previous steps, resynthesizes two-qubit blocks of gates in the circuit.

> If you'd like to read more about the preset pass managers or the transpiler stages, look to the section on [Transpiler Stages & Preset PassManagers](passmanagers.ipynb).

Reviewer 4: This link is bad. What is it supposed to refer to?

Author: It's a page being worked on in a parallel PR: https://github.com/Qiskit/documentation/pull/283/files

Reviewer: The page that will exist once #283 is finished and merged.  Should I wait on linking it until that's done?

> If you'd like to read more about the preset pass managers or the transpiler stages, look to the section on [Transpiler Stages & Preset PassManagers](passmanagers.ipynb).

Author: ```suggestion
If you'd like to read more about the preset pass managers or the transpiler stages, look to the section on [Transpiler stages and preset PassManagers](passmanagers.ipynb).
```

Author: After a quick google across Qiskit, I see the spacing and capitalization of passmanager (PassManager? pass manager? Pass Manager?) varies quite a bit (specifically for occurrences outside of code formatting).... thoughts on the right way to write it @javabster ?

> ## Customizing Passes

Author: ```suggestion
## Customize passes
```

> If you'd like to read more about the preset pass managers or the transpiler stages, look to the section on [Transpiler stages and preset PassManagers](passmanagers.ipynb).

Author: ```suggestion
If you'd like to read more about the preset pass managers or the transpiler stages, look to the section on [Transpiler stages and preset PassManagers](passmanagers.ipynb). To learn how to use the `.transpile()` function, see the [Transpilation default settings and configuration options](defaults_and_configuration_options) topic.
```

Author: page does not exist yet so this link will break

> For more advanced users, you can customize your own set of `PassManager` and `StagedPassManager` objects and determine the ordering in which each stage is run.  This can dramatically change the final circuit which is output. If fact, oftentimes a bespoke approach to transpiling a quantum algorithm produces more efficient error suppression than the default approach.  This involves rewriting quantum circuits to match hardware constraints and suppressing the effects of noise.  The flow of logic for this tool chain is quite customizable and need not be linear.  The transpilation process can even prepare iterative loops, conditional branches, and other complex behaviors.  A good starting place when developing a set of custom passes is by looking to the default sequence of transformations:

Author: ```suggestion
For more advanced users, you can customize your own set of `PassManager` and `StagedPassManager` objects and determine the ordering in which each stage is run.  This can dramatically change the final output circuit. In fact, oftentimes a bespoke approach to transpiling a quantum algorithm produces more efficient error suppression than the default approach.  This involves rewriting quantum circuits to match hardware constraints and suppressing the effects of noise.  The flow of logic for this tool chain is quite customizable and need not be linear.  The transpilation process can even prepare iterative loops, conditional branches, and other complex behaviors.  A good starting place when developing a set of custom passes is to look at the default sequence of transformations:
```

Reviewer: What about "to examine" rather than "to look at"?

Author: Yep! That's better :)

Reviewer: Done!  And addressed the rest of your suggestions.

A central component of Qiskit, the transpiler is designed for modularity and extensibility. The goal is to be able to easily write new circuit transformations (known as transpiler **passes**), and combine them with other existing passes.  Which passes are chained together and in which order has a major effect on the final outcome. This pipeline is determined by a **pass manager**, which schedules the passes and also allows passes to communicate with each other by providing a shared space. In this way, the transpiler opens up the door for research into aggressive optimization of quantum circuits.

This documentation covers the tooling and workflows available to Qiskit users.  If you're using primitives and are only interested in st using the default transpilation options, look to the section [Configure error suppression for Qiskit Runtime.](../run/configure-runtime-compilation)

## Default Transpilation

> The basic usage of the transpiler is to call the `qiskit.compiler.transpile()`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.compiler) function.  This will generate one of the present `PassManager`s based on, among other options, an `optimization_level` flag which can be set to either 0, 1, 2, or 3.  Higher levels generate more optimized circuits, at the expense of longer transpilation times.  Each of these preset `PassMangers` are composed of six basic stages:

Author: @kaelynj Would this be the right link to the API? `../api/qiskit/compiler#compilation-routines` (goes [here](https://docs.quantum-computing.ibm.com/api/qiskit/compiler#compilation-routines))

Reviewer: I think so?  It'd be nice if we could point directly to the function in that long api reference page, but not sure what the status of those are.  Also I can't seem to load the api pages in my local build of the site for some reason.

Author: I have the same problem -- I think the local build just doesn't like it!!

Author: Anyone know how to figure out if this [qiskit.compiler.transpile](https://qiskit.org/documentation/stable/0.28/stubs/qiskit.compiler.transpile.html) page is deprecated, since I see it on qiskit.org but not in our API docs. @Eric-Arellano? @javabster?
